[ Music ]
>> Lilou: Hello, my juicy
co-creators. This is Lilou here
in
London in England, ready to have
another delicious conversation
with you, Jay, today.
Thank you for accepting to do
this interview, this to meet
up here in beautiful,
sunny London. Wow.
>> Jay Lakhani: Yes,
we are lucky to get
such good weather, Lilou.
>> Lilou: So there's many
topics to speak with you about.
I saw your, you know,
your TEDx,
and there you were
talking of quantum physics,
but you're very much
interested about religion, too,
and you often speak at colleges
and you did your own studies
as a physician or a physicist?
>> Lakhani: Physicist.
>> Lilou: So we can go in many,
many different topics
and I love that.
I love when I can
ask any question
and basically the
person is right there.
You're originally
from Kenya, right?
>> Lakhani: Yes, I
was born in Kenya.
I'm a Hindu from India
originally family wise,
but I was personally
born in Kenya.
>> Lilou: So first since we have
to start somewhere, I would love
to speak of the religious aspect
just to see where you're at
and what you feel where
people are at around the world
because this is a
big topic right now
and you get to speak
at colleges.
So what is your view on the
whole religion even though
if you're Hindu, how do you
view this and where is it
at right now in the world?
>> Lakhani: You see I personally
believe that all religions,
all of them, not Hinduism only,
all religious basically are
pointing at a deeper dimension
to reality that we're not
normally aware of.
So religions have a way
of polarizing our minds
to a deeper dimension reality
that is sometimes missed out.
For example, we live
very material life
and underpinning
this material world
and underpinning our essential
being, there's something
non-material that is trying
to manifest or express itself
and that I call spiritual.
So, my journey is really
to try and suss
out the human condition
and to see
if there's something
much more to us
than what meets the eye,
the material frame.
>> Lilou: And where do you
think, because you speak
to colleges, at 16 year
olds, 18 year olds,
where do you think they're at
and where is society
at with that?
>> Lakhani: The world is
very interesting now, you see,
because we sometimes feel
the modern society has
forgotten religions and
they're going to become
and they're lost in the way.
It's nothing of the sort.
Humanity continues to
evolve and evolve at a pace
that suits his own requirement.
What I find with the modern
youth is a very refreshing
approach to what religions
were all about in the past,
and so they are trying
to re-explore
or rediscover the spiritual
underpinning
without using a prescriptive
religion. So this is a reality.
When I go to schools, I do lots
of assemblies. I must have gone
to few hundred schools in
London or UK I would say
and I've done a few hundred
assemblies, and when I ask 16
to 18 year age group and you
take your name as a Hindu
or a Buddhist or whatever,
but do you truly agree
with this enterprise?
What I am finding surprisingly
and perhaps very interestingly
is that sometimes 90% of these
youngsters who are thinking
for themselves now very
happily put their hands
up as being agnostic,
they're not sure
about their religious
enterprise,
or as atheists saying
the religions are definitely
flawed. They're wrong.
So this is reality.
We're living in a world where
the majority
of youngsters now can no longer
relate to a prescriptive
religion.
Hinduism or Christianity
or whatever.
This is reality.
>> Lilou: So how, because I saw
your talks on quantum physics,
how is quantum physics
related to the spiritual world?
>> Lakhani: Suppose I was
talking to the elite thinking
youngsters in this country, at
MIT, at Oxford University
and Eatong College,
et cetera,
and suppose I said look,
here is this, you know,
this marvelous scripture of the
ancient Hindus, and we talk
about this and they run away
from me. But if I say look,
I come from a science lobby
and not a hippy science
but, I feel, a very mainstream
science lobby.
I studied physics at Imperial
College and specialized
in quantum mechanics, which
is supposed to be very stylish
and esoteric physics, and I did
it under somebody very famous,
Roger Penrose,
who is probably the second
most important physicist
in the country. So, I come
with the right pedigree
of science pedigree so when I
present my ideas regarding what
I think is spirituality in
a format which is rational
and science oriented, of course
I steal the show.
They love me. They applaud
me very warmly and, you know,
sometimes wait in a line
to shake my hand
saying we loved that,
Mr. Lakhani! That was very
interesting.
So, in fact, the support I
get regarding my vision
about spirituality doesn't come
from antiquitious
scriptures of the Hindus,
it comes from modern
science itself
and that is why I really
find myself excited
about the whole enterprise.
>> Lilou: Is there some
point that you shifted
after your studies or you've
always been thinking that way
and yet you decided
to study science?
>> Lakhani: Yes.
You see like almost
all youngsters
of all religions you start
because in a traditional manner.
You're born in a
particular family
with a particular
religious tradition.
So you subscribe to it and
you dance about with it
and you enjoy the colorful
narratives and do the liturgy
and rituals and festivals and
it's all marvelous.
So that's how the journey
started, but when I was 15,
I started to challenge this idea
about a supreme personality
called God
who started the Creation.
I didn't agree.
I couldn't accept it
anymore so I started fighting
with my father saying
there's no God.
So I turned into an atheist.
This is reality.
I was a crass atheist saying
this whole thing is nonsense,
they put on old wives'
tales. It's not for real.
This religious enterprise
is nonsense.
So I had to fight with my
father almost regularly
and he enjoyed it.
He smiled and would respond to
me.
So at that stage, at age of 15,
I was an atheist really and then
when I became 16, 17, I
started to dig deeper.
So I said rather than focus
on ancient personalities
of Hindu religion,
why not focus on modern
spiritual personalities
of the Hindu tradition, see
if they make sense to me.
And here I discovered if you
like real treasure because
I discovered certain modern
personalities who touched my
heart and captured my attention.
I'll give the names.
One was Ramana Maharshi
who lived in South India.
Here you see an individual lit
up, something has touched him,
something dramatic has happened
to him you can make out.
There's no artificiality,
he's not selling any gimmicks,
he's just, you know, established
in the real knowledge
of the spirits.
So you see this kind of
personality, but the personality
that stole my heart is a
personality called Ramakrishna
who lived in Bengal in the
1890s, 1880s I would say,
and his disciple Vivekananda,
really captured my attention
because here is a man who
had a similar journey.
He was an atheist in his
young days. He was in search
of spirituality, and he would
only accept spirituality
if he discovered some individual
who could claim the spirituality
as the matter of experience for
that person and wasn't a measure
of book learning or
intellectual acceptance.
So the journey that
Vivekananda took on of trying
to discover some individual
who is absolutely, you know,
embedded in the idea
of the spirit, not
just intellectually
but experientially is
what he was looking for,
that's what I was looking for.
So found my mentor
in Ramakrishna, Vivekananda.
So I was studying at
the Imperial College
in Kensington here
just around the corner
and while I was studying
physics I came across material,
the literature of
Ramakrishna, Vivekananda
that gave me the
thrill of my life.
It was the most life
transforming experience for me.
So studying the lectures,
et cetera,
of these two personalities were
not talking about spirituality
from some kind of, you
know, book learning
but actually first hand
encounter that image, you know,
that caught my attention.
So I was studying
their lifestyle.
While I was doing physics,
I was at the same time studying
spirituality represented
in this modern format, the
rational format, a format
that would appeal
to a commonsensical
person like me, a youngster.
>> Lilou: So never at any point
did it, was it counter,
not counterintuitive, but just
saying two separate things.
Science was saying one thing
and your studies
were saying another?
>> Lakhani: No, no, in
fact to the contrary.
I found that some of the issues
that science was struggling
with were better explored
by this deeper vision
of religion or spirituality.
I'll give you some examples.
For example, this particular
juncture we are talking
about quantum physics being
very exciting enterprise and
yet conceptually very
difficult to understand.
Suddenly I realized that what
spirituality is now telling us
is gives you a conceptual grasp
of what quantum physics is all
about, and this is the
heart of the matter.
It says that despite
appearances,
if you feel you can explain this
creation, this reality in terms
of matter and the epiphenomena
of matter means that attributes
of matter if you can
just link those things
up you can explain the
whole of this creation
then quantum physics
says, no, it's not true.
The underpinning to this
reality we guarantee
to be known material and
matter is an outer appearance.
This is, you know, Erwin
Schrodinger.
So this is dramatic material
to come out of physics
which is now telling
the physicality
of the physical world and
this fits extremely well
with a deeper vision of religion
that comes with Hinduism saying
that the underpinning to this
reality is not material, it is
essentially spirit
but when it manifests itself
at the first level,
it appears as matter.
But matter is an
appearance organized
in tremendous resonance but
in quantum physics and what
Hindu philosophy, esoteric Hindu
philosophy, this is non-theistic
Hinduism. this is not, you
know, supreme personality
setting the world into motion,
but this is a very deeper vision
of what Hinduism is all about
and they set well with
each other extremely well.
>> Lilou: The people
that represent sometimes
these religion
or you were saying
Maharshi, you know,
there's some controversy
sometimes
about these people, right?
For example I mean
from my understanding
or what I remember he had
created the transcendental
meditation, was that him?
>> Lakhani No, I think
you are mixing up.
>> Lilou: I'm mixing
up with the --
>> Lakhani: No, I
tell you the one
that influenced me was
Ramana Maharshi, and he never
came out of India. He hardly
left his keoh.
Completely different.
Maharishi Mahesh is a different
cup of tea altogether
and I am not a fan
of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi.
Quite frankly, I'm not a fan.
I'm a fan of Ramana Maharshi
who lived in South India
and this is important
question that you raise.
The Hindu system
is an open system.
It's a very liberal
system and allows a variety
of different ways of
exploring spirituality.
It's the grand idea of Hinduism.
It's very majestic
and very open,
but when you've got any open
system, it is open for abuse.
Hinduism has been abused in
no uncertain terms by not one,
but hundreds of people who
are either self-deluded,
they mean well but are deluded,
and you know considering
meditation is pure daydreaming.
They are self-deluded so
they come into the system
and there are many who
are out to delude you.
So because it is an open system
it is definitely open to abuse
and Hindus pay a heavy
price for this openness.
Lots of charlatans climb
the bandwagon of Hinduism
and are promoting some gimmicks
or their own personality,
introducing cults and
this kind of, you know,
very dangerous movement.
So we are open to that I agree,
but the names I am
promoting very blatantly
and without any hesitation
is Ramana Maharshi who lived
in South India and Paul Brunton
was often a constant visitor
there and you can
see some marvelous, some
of the discussions he
had with Ramana Maharshi
and the other two persons,
Ramakrishna
who lived in Bengal in 1860s,
70s,
80s, and his disciple
Vivekananda.
These are very famous
personalities.
>> Lilou: But going back
to this aspect of religion
and how human beings are
kind of doing their own thing
with those precious,
ancient texts and it happens
in all religions,
how can we go back?
What is really the core and
the essence of all of them?
Can we go back to that message?
Because it seems like, you
know, it's been human beings
after human beings
changing the text
and making it whatever they
wanted and, unfortunately,
that's why we just don't
connect now with it.
>> Lakhani: Indeed.
You see the thing is this. Let's
go to the heart of the matter.
If you look at every mystical
tradition, every religion,
at the heart of this
mystical tradition
or religion would be some
individual, some personalities
who are there because they
encountered the spirit
if you like.
They helped us phase with what
is underpinning this reality
including themselves.
This has been very life
transforming experience
for them.
They become prophets of mankind.
They become the leaders
of this particular field.
Now every society,
every civilization throughout
the ages have produced
such personalities.
But for every 1 genuine there
may be 99 who are kind of, you
know, getting on the bandwagon.
So there's always a risk, but
there are some individuals
in the Christian tradition,
in the Sufi tradition,
in the Hindu tradition
you find marvelous,
you can see there is no
gimmick, there's no put on,
they're just completely
transformed
and the litmus test is this
after the encounter, not only
are their lives transformed
for the better, the lives
of anybody they interact
with is transformed
for the better as well.
This is the proof
of the pudding.
If it's a charlatan,
somebody selling gimmicks,
his life is not transformed,
he's just messing around
and is going to mess
up the lives of a lot
of other individuals, but the
genuine ones can light up
humanity, and around anybody who
comes into the circle
of influence will be transformed
for the better forever.
This is the proof of the pudding
that something dramatic is
happening; it's not just a put
on and it's not just a wooly
staff because this is
where the science
logic kind of challenges
the mystical ideas saying look,
it's all a matter of physics
and it's all wooly and it's all
floaty stuff and you can put
on music and floating,
you're on ground and stop all
this nonsense.
So they keep continue
to challenge,
understandably challenge this
kind of, you know, traditions,
but then you come across
certain individuals
that are talking
from experience.
You can see that they are lit
up and they've got the ability
to light up anybody
who comes near them.
This is the proof
of the pudding.
>> Lilou: Beautiful.
And the message at the core
of all religions you think
because sometimes it seems
like the core of the core
and the secret of it all
seems to be related to space
and time also, which is
another conversation I would
like to have with you and I
don't know if you agree or not
but what is really at the
core of the heart of the heart
of all those religious?
>> Lakhani: This is a very
beautiful question because I
like to develop this at
universities and I do a lot
of talks at many post graduate
levels at many including Oxford.
I tell them this I said
this Hindu is insisting
that at the experiential
level, not intellectual
but at the experiential
level, every profit,
every mystic hits the same
jackpot and always come
out of the experience
saying the experience was
such a wow experience that there
are no words to express it.
There's no way we can
articulate or use certain words
to give expression to
what we have experienced.
This is beyond words,
transcendent,
they use such word that's fine.
The next moment this
is the great fun.
They will try and put their
experience into words.
They will try and
give expression
to what they say is
difficult to express.
And why do they do that?
Are they trying to compromise?
No. They love humanity.
Once you hit the
jackpot, you fall in love
with the whole humanity.
You can't help yourself.
So now they want to pass
on this thrilling, you know,
experience to rest of humanity.
So they'll use every
ploy, they'll squirm,
they'll use every
ploy to put across
or give expression
to their experience.
Now here the fun begins.
I'm suggesting and
I'm insisting upon it.
Suppose Christ goes
into the wilderness
and comes back a transformed
person and he's interacting
with greater society
what does he say?
He says I encountered
the father in heaven.
That particular mindset
of the words he uses,
the vocabulary he uses reflects
his own mindset and the mindset
of the people he is
interacting with.
It cannot be otherwise.
So the idea of the
spirit becomes visible
at this great super personality
in the heaven as a father figure
and you may smile but see this
is how he gives expression
to his spiritual experience.
Then Buddha sits under the bodhi
tree,
gets thriiled, hits the jackpot,
and does he say he's
met the father in heaven?
No, he says I'm enlightened.
He says you will
become enlightened.
It's different expression.
Every mystic, every
great personality,
spiritual personality
has the same problem.
They experience this
transcendent beyond words
and they try and articulate in
the best, they don't compromise,
they just love humanity so they
want to give expression to it
so they'll use the mindset
they possess themselves.
It cannot be otherwise.
In the minds of the
people they are interacting
with how can they communicate?
All this will kick in and
this is why you have the same
experience given
different expressions
or different religions.
So the heart of every religion
as you said quite rightly
is the same fountainhead
but when this particular,
you know, when it flows out,
it comes out in different
colors because when you try
and give expression we
are unfortunately stuck
with the language we use
in order to articulate this
and that then, of course,
we see a variation.
Same experience, different
expressions.
So this is like the
reconciliation of a multitude
of religious world views.
This is one aspect.
The fun part is this, okay,
so we can say there are
multiple religious expressions
and, Mr. Lakhani, you meant it
reconciles... well, maybe you're
right, maybe it's not right, but
so be it,
but what about the
science chaps?
Because they are saying we don't
like this spirit stuff.
The only spirit we
believe in comes
in bottles during Christmastime.
So what is all of this?
How do reconcile a science
oriented rational world view
with this kind of very high
flying spiritual world view?
The answer is this, it is the
integrity of modern science
that is now very clearly
pointing at a deeper dimension
to reality so they are no
longer fixated on the externals.
So it's modern science and the
integrity of modern science
that is now again prompting a
deeper vision
regarding what this reality is
all about and this is again
resonating extremely well
with the prophets
we're talking about.
They're trying to express
it in their own limited way,
in a very, you know,
anthropologic manner but here
through science we did non
kind of personality oriented,
it's principle oriented
enterprise is now, again,
pointing out a deeper
dimension to reality,
which is very thrilling.
So, I tell youngsters, I say if
you want to be spiritual,
you can say can I study
the Bag-- Hindu?
No, no, no, look my friends.
Study the science of today.
If you are genuine about
spirituality, study,
if you like the cutting edge
discoveries of modern physics
or modern neuroscience.
You'll hit the same jackpot
that the prophets
hit through meditation
and through various enterprises.
So, it is a science of today
that will lead not hundreds
but thousands and millions
of people on the path
of spirituality without
a prescriptive religion.
>> Lilou: Sciences is
very precise, right?
Whereas what you just said is
these people had a hard time
to put it in words.
So how can those two meet?
>> Lakhani: Yes, the thing
is what I'm saying is
that we do not need to verify
the religious enterprise.
We see it as a limited
attempt to try
and articulate a very
difficult subject.
So, there's nothing wrong
with any of these prophets,
I love them all, they are lovely
chaps trying to do a good job.
They love because
they hit the jackpot
and that's what life
is all about.
So they are trying to give
expression
to the rest of humanity
and they are struggling.
But now, without the prophets,
without the God sitting
in heaven, science itself is
saying look, there's more to you
than meets the eye.
See, yes? Oh, yes! See,
in neuroscience they'll say you
see Mr. Lakhani the hard problem
for neuroscience is
called consciousness.
We don't know what the heck
it is, where it comes from,
it seems to be everywhere
and nowhere
and we don't know what it is
and then we've got this kind of,
then it's writing
textbooks to explain it away
but they are just throwing a
jumble of jargon in your face
but they're not really
explaining what consciousness
is about.
Can you kindly throw
light on it?
I said it is light my
friend, it is light.
[Laughter] But this is
how we see the integrity
of modern science, physical
sciences with the life sciences
which are now clearly,
I'm suggesting
and strongly promoting
the idea, of pointing
at a deeper dimension to
reality that's been rediscovered
through the integrity of science
not through any prophets,
the integrity is non-personal,
it's not a personality orienting
the subject, it's a principle
in the subject is finding the
same thing without the tops
and tails of religion.
>> Lilou: Yeah.
>> Lakhani: So be it.
>> Lilou: Some people try to
find the God atom, you know.
>> Lakhani: The God particle?
The God particle actually
the name was a mistake.
When they were actually trying
to finish the jigsaw puzzle
of elementary particles and
these particles are tricky.
They were calling God damn it
particles, it's difficult
to find.
Suddenly they made a mistake, it
became God particle.
This particle doesn't prove God
or disprove God. It has nothing
to do with the poor chap. Leave
him alone.
It's simply part of a jigsaw
puzzle, which was puzzling
so it was called God Damn It and
disappeared
and became God particle and
turned
into a major kind of, you know,
science and religion meet.
They're not meeting up at all.
Science, with its own integrity,
suggests talking about how we
can try and explain the reality
through using this jigsaw puzzle
of elementary particles and
one particle was called this
boson that was missing
is now they say it has been
discovered through the Hadron
Collider,
but the thing doesn't make
any difference to ideas
of spirituality or
of science either.
It just basically filling
the gap in the jigsaw puzzle.
That's all it's done.
>> Lilou: So what
is essential to know
or where is exactly this quantum
physics and the cutting edge
as you say physics
are pointing at?
Because we hear of the black
holes, we hear of energy and all
of it seems to be, you know,
we're all energy and invisible
so tell us in your own words,
you know, what it looks like.
>> Lakhani: Okay, first
of all because you touched
on the words space and time,
et cetera, let me just focus
on what I'm going to say next.
You see because what's happened
I just show you how science
and religion link at
a very deep level.
Now my mentorVivekananda
was in London in 1896
and he gave a lecture
here called Absolute
and Manifestations saying
that how can the spirit
become this visible world
that we are sure about
in front of our eyes?
I mean how does the
transition take place?
Now you may be surprised at
what he said in 1896 in London
with what we have discovered
or what we call now
the Big Bang Theory.
I'll just tell you
the crux of it.
The Big Bang Theory basically
using the integrity of science
and the Hubble Telescope have
discovered that all galaxies
in every direction are running
away from you
at a faster and faster speed.
So they said why don't we run
the film backwards?
So we run the film backwards all
the galaxies come together
at one point and that would
take, what, 37 billion years?
But then the whole thing
collapses and comes to a big,
this is the beginning
of creation.
So they say, ah, we discovered
the story of creation.
There's no gold city
in the heaven.
Basically space and time unfold.
There is no bang as such
but space and time unfold
like folded up and
they unfold and when space
and time unfold, creation
comes into being.
So there are two dimensions to
reality that are space and time.
When they unfold,
creation comes into being.
So far so good.
A question still remained.
Who pressed the button for
space and time to unfold?
So the religious people get into
the lobby saying yeah, God.
God did that, so God pressed the
button and the Big Bang started,
so God is still okay.
God is safe.
In reality, God is
still not safe.
Vivekananda in 1896 in the
lecture, and I was studying at
Imperial College, while I was
studying physics,
said the following.
I was amazed. This was before
Hubble telescope, before
Einstein, before Newton, not
before him but before Einstein,
he said three things unfold for
creation to come into being,
not two, and it's got nothing
to do with space and time.
The Big Bang Theory
is unheard of in 1896.
He said three things unfold for
creation to come into being.
I was amazed. I though, three
things?
I thought elementary
particles? What is three things?
This is what he said.
He said desa, kala, nimitta. We
say Sanskrit,
we say
space, time, and causation
When they unfold,
creation comes into being.
I was amazed by this man's,
you know, kind of insight
into nature of reality.
So when I studied the Big Bang
Theory, which is much later
and it came into being just
literally 50 years ago,
When I was studying the Big Bang
Theory, I said this is amazing
because one question the Big
Bang Theory
has not answered is this,
if you ask Steven Hawking, "What
was there before the Big Bang?"
He would say in his lovely way,
"Don't ask the silly question.
There was no time, so the
question is irrelevant,
so don't ask what
was before Big Bang
because there was no before.
Time came with the Big Bang, so
stop asking silly questions."
If you ask Steven
Hawking who caused
or what caused the Big
Bang, what's the causation?
He'll say I don't know,
but Vivekananda comes
with answer. He said three
things unfold not two.
Causation comes with
the Big Bang.
So if you had to ask
who caused the Big Bang,
that question is irrelevant
because there was no causation
so it's spontaneous without
need for a God, without need
for what caused the Big
Bang comes through if
like the deeper vision
of religion space, time,
causation unfolding for this
creation to come into being.
See, when idea of cause and
effect comes with the Big Bang,
so you can't say who caused
or what caused the Big Bang,
who pressed the button.
You can't ask that question.
It's irrelevant.
So you see I'm showing you how
the deeper vision that comes
out of religious lobby
kind of not only sits well
with modern science, in
fact, it gives answers to
what modern science sometimes is
not able to sort out.
So this is a beautiful
idea of how space,
time and causation
is the beginning
of the whole of this creation.
>> Lilou: Yeah, and that space
and time are not limited, right?
I feel this is the biggest
trap right now that we're
in like it stresses
us doesn't it?
I mean in places like London,
boy, we're running after time,
after space, after all of it.
This is a big suffering here.
This is not the truth.
It's like the truth
has been misplaced.
>> Lakhani: Space, time and
causation basically are if you
like the intricate dimensions
in which the creation
can manifest itself.
So, the idea and absolute
manifestation the first level
of space, time and causation are
like the first level
of manifestation.
What is manifested, what appears
in space, time, causation if you
like, the secondary level and
then you can see matter coming
into being. This is the
second stage of creation then
in the material world,
this is where I come
to what you just said, whenever
we see a living thing buzzing
even bacteria single-celled
being, the very thing
that was underpinning
reality which manifests itself
as the material
world is now trying
to find greater way
of expressing itself.
So when you see some
DNA coming together,
some molecules coming together,
we don't say it's accidental.
We say the thing that's
underpinning is trying
to find better expression.
So the material world
is not good enough.
It comes visible
as living thing.
If this particular
manifestation continues
to become much more elaborate
until it hits this human frame
so the same things trying to
express itself as
a living thing
becomes most transparent,
most visible as humanity.
So the clearest vision of God
on earth or the clearest vision
of spirit, someone
said what's spirit?
I said don't you see?
Look in the mirror.
You are the clearest
vision of the spirit.
Man and women are the
clearest image of God on earth.
Not one man, the whole
of humanity is the
clearest manifestation
of what is underpinning.
It expresses material world;
space, time, causation.
In the material world, the
buzzing that you see is, if you
like, spirit percolating,
coming through more clearly,
and humanity is the best
expression of the spirit.
>> Lilou: At the same
time our body dissolve
and we're here only
a certain time
and so where is this really?
We stress and we have
emotions and all of this.
So, where do we look at?
>> Lakhani: We look
at many places.
For example, the India tradition
means Hinduism, Buddhism,
Chinese, some say
your journey doesn't
stop when the body dies.
Death is seen as a comma and not
a full stop in the tradition.
So if you say what happens when
the body dies and you dissolve
and your body, you dissolve it
or you burn it, what happens?
Well, the thing that is
underpinning has not lost
its journey.
It continues the journey, it
manifests itself in another body
until it discovers what you
said why does it continue
to be reborn?
Why does it bother?
You've got the drives.
Now, again, when you want
suss out the human condition,
it's not only the physical world
that you look at but
you look at inner man.
Now, we all have lots of drives,
lots of emotions and we see
if you like appear to be kind
of, you know, unfulfillable,
difficult to fulfill and
a continuous struggle
to find expression
or to resolve our human
condition or fulfill desires.
Now, this is if you like the
reason why we continue the
journey of reincarnation.
The thing that is trying to
get fulfillment struggles
in one lifetime so it
tries to get fulfillment
in the second life or the next
life and carries on the journey
and the only way this
fulfillment comes
and the reason this will
continue, the only resolution
of this human dilemma is
when the individual rediscovers
its essential nature, not
as a material being chasing
after material objectives
but a spiritual being.
So once it discovers that I am
the spirit. Again, this is
experiential, not
intellectual. "Oh, I believe
that!" doesn't help you.
Your desires are still going
to come and bother you.
So when you experience that you
are the spirit, you are full
and resplendent, there's
nothing missing in you,
then desires fall away, then
no more reincarnation.
So then the human condition
has been resolved permanently
because then you say
I am full. What desires?
I don't have to fight desires.
They don't bother me anymore.
They fall off.
If you look at every prophet,
this is what happens
in the lives.
You see desires drop off.
It's not better to fight it and
bottle it up.
They just disappear.
They just fizzle away.
They discover their real nature
in the spirit so the resolution
of the human condition is not
in the material level
it's a spiritual level
to rediscover our identity
as spirit, and once you do
that, the journey comes
to a halt in a nice manner.
It's not that you, you know,
lose your individuality.
You discover your individuality,
you are the spirit,
my friend, you are that.
That's what humanity
is studying up to do.
It does it through its
various methods of trying
to fulfill wishes, trying to
chase after pleasurable things.
So, all these hedonistic
pursuits
that we see are not to be
villified.
We are trying to find
expression of fulfillment
through this hedonistic journey.
I like pleasurable things.
Why not? No, why? Really, why?
This is his journey.
It's only when it gets whacked
left and right
and suddenly something is wrong
here.
Then he says something...
I need to find a better way.
So you say, oh, I must
chase after this objective
or that objective and
you get that objective
and three more desires arise.
So where do they come from?
You fulfill them and three
more arise, thirty more arise
and you say this is
getting out of hand.
So when the maturity arises
something is wrong here,
we've been chasing
after shadows.
When the maturity
comes naturally,
it's not by a guru saying
oh, don't do this,
Stop your desire! It won't work.
When the maturity comes
from within. I know something is
seriously wrong here I've been
chasing and biting at shadows,
and I'm not getting fulfilled.
So what is the reason?
When that starting up comes,
then you become truly
interested in spiritualty.
Otherwise you're
just tokenistic.
>> Lilou: Yeah, yeah.
It feels like once
there's this recognition
that we are spirit then related
to this time/space conversation
then it's not even a
conversation anymore.
>> Lakhani: Space
and time again follow
because the spirit is not
something that is singular
or plural, it's not in
this part of the location
because people say Mr. Lakhani,
if we are spirit,
which part of the
universe are we?
I said don't you see the
university is in you, not you,
so you don't find
yourself here or there.
If you believe in this idea
of spirit, it underpins all
of reality, all of space,
all of time, whole cosmos.
If you are underpinning,
you can't say where am I?
You are everywhere
and nowhere really.
You aren't in any
individual object and
yet you underpin the
whole of this creation.
Again, it sounds very nice
and artistic and, you know,
poetic, but really
what I'm saying is you need
to experience it.
Look at the lives of prophets.
They live as if they
own the whole universe
and desire nothing from it.
This is the sign of a prophett.
They seem..they walk about with
the majest
of a real master
of the universe and
yet there are not desires of
any aspect of this master.
They don't own this or that.
They walk like real masters
otherwise they become slaves.
If desires infect them,
they're no better than us.
The desires drop off and they
live a very masterful life.
Look at their lives.
If that doesn't charge you up,
nothing else will.
People say should I be
studying philosophy?
No, no, I said study the
lives of recent personalities
that attract you who are
spiritually oriented.
Just look at their lives,
this is very personal,
very anthropocentric so you're
looking at human condition
and human resolution
and look at the lives.
See if it doesn't capture
you, nothing else will.
Philosophy comes afterwards.
>> Lilou: The oneness, a lot of
people speak of this oneness,
do you think this is something
that's related to coming back
to our spirit, right,
and to understand
that we are all interconnected?
>> Lakhani: Again, the
spirit is never plural,
it is always singular.
It's not that my spirit is
different from your spirit.
The thing that is looking out
through my eyes and bubbling
up through this particular
frame is also bubbling
out through that
particular frame.
So the link that I have with
other humanity, it's not
at the material level as Dawkins
would suggest but at the deeper,
spiritual level we
are linked up.
So that is why, you know,
this is again a very
interesting litmus test.
The reason why all the prophets
were in love with humanity is
because they were... actually
experienced that oneness
with the rest of humanity.
They see themselves reflected
in other human beings
so they are stuck.
You see they want to express.
So the same is true with this
oneness is something, again,
if you look at some of the
modern mystic poets they will
talk about the same thing
without the tops and turns
of religion. They will
say a great peace seems
to descend on us.
We seem to be one with
the whole of creation.
This is a sign of a
spiritual experience.
>> Lilou: Like Rumi, who was
great.
>> Lakhani: Rumi or lots of
other, you know, William Blake,
a lot of them when they talk of
this Wadsworth, when they talk
of this oneness, you can
feel they're feeling it
with whole of creation.
When you see that
visible in their poetry
or in the literature, when you
read it, it gives you a thrill
because some of that thing
is passed on to you
through that particular
vocabulary.
So in a way, this
oneness is something.
Again, the only way
you'll overcome, you know,
we were talking about earlier
about fear is when you say
that I am one with whole
creation how can you be fearful
of anything?
It's you alone with everything.
So, fear that is natural kind
of thing that you possess
from the animal kingdom that in
faction we have fear it will
drop off as well.
Fear? What fear?
So discovering the oneness
is the only way you overcome
fear forever.
This is, again, it's not
just a negative thing
that you work on fear.
It's a very positive, very
exciting experiential dimension
because you can say, oh,
close my eyes and meditate.
That's a very limited
way of meditating.
Meditate with open eyes.
With open eyes look around
and see your link with all
of creations especially with
human beings who light up.
This is becoming one of
meditating with open eyes.
Why not? This is what my mentor
Vivekananda used to do.
You see when he talks,
he talks with the spirit.
Anybody that comes near him
is, of course, charged up.
Also with Raman Maharshi.
When Brunton used to visit Raman
Maharshi,
he would say sometimes Raman
Maharshi wouldn't speak at all.
He'll just look at
you and his glance
at you would really lift you
off that I'm no longer the body,
I am the spirit of--
Oh, chaps,
I feel I'm floating.
These are the real experience
of real genuine prophets
who are not only
talking about oneness
who are experiencing oneness.
If you come in front of them,
you experience the same oneness.
It lifts you off, your very
limited vision regarding
who you think you are,
suddenly from the very limited
vision, that dream is broken
and you see oneness
with greater creation.
>> Lilou: Yeah, does that
shadow or that darker side
or that fear is just,
because we hear, you know,
the more lighter you feel,
the more enlightened you feel
the more dark also comes is
that true or is it just?
>> Lakhani: You see,
the thing is this again
in the Hindi tradition we
don't tell evil as such.
There's no evil, you
know, throwing his light on us.
We simply say in the
process of manifesting
in this particular
manner we have to go
through many different
life forms and you're going
through the animal life form.
Hindus agree with Darwin. We
come out of animal kingdom.
So if you are going through this
particular journey of passing
through many animal
lifetimes in the animal life,
life is very cruel, very cruel.
It's eat or be eaten.
It's very nasty as they
say the life is, you know,
nature is red in tooth and claw.
It's violent and vicious.
So a lot of these things
we acquired have come
from the animal kingdom.
>> Lilou: Survival
of the fittest.
>> Lakhani: Survival
So all these ideas or
even fighting for yourself
or competitive spirit or
crushing the weak was acquired
in the animal kingdom.
That was the name of the
game in the animal kingdom.
So, survival of the fittest
was the name of the game
in the animal kingdom, but when
you enter the human kingdom we
still inherit some
of these features.
That's why some human beings so
vicious, so violent, so nasty.
Not because they're an evil
person.
They're in a way expressing what
they already-- the baggage they
carry from the animal kingdom.
It's only when they're in the
human kingdom you slowly begin
to become rounded and you now
no longer see yourself fighting
for survival.
You see yourself in
other human beings, so rather
than killing others you
want to cooperate rather
than compete with others.
So the idea of not competing
but cooperating with others
because natural because the
human kingdom you can do that.
The animal kingdom
you are just stuck.
>> Lilou: It's time to evolve?
>> Lakhani: Time to evolve.
Absolutely.
>> Lilou: Thank you
so much, Jay,
for this delicious conversation.
I really enjoyed it.
Is there a last thing that
you want to leave us with
or something else that
is on your mind or heart?
>> Lakhani: The universe,
humanity's evolving
at its own pace in
a wonderful manner.
It doesn't need any
help from me.
[Laughter]
>> Lilou: Thank you.
Thank you so much.
It was really pleasurable.
Thank you.
Thank you! Much, much love
from beautiful London.
Big kisses to all of you.
Byebye.
[ Music ]